% -*- Mode: LaTeX; Package: CLIM-USER -*-

\chapter {Affine Transformations}
\label {transforms}

An \concept{affine transformation} is a mapping from one coordinate system onto
another that preserves straight lines.  In other words, if you take a number of
points that fall on a straight line and apply an affine transformation to their
coordinates, the transformed coordinates will describe a straight line in the
new coordinate system.  General affine transformations include all the sorts of
transformations that CLIM uses, namely, translations, scaling, rotations, and
reflections.


\section {Transformations}

\Defprotoclass {transformation}

The protocol class of all transformations.  There are one or more subclasses of
\cl{transformation} with implementation-dependent names that implement
transformations.  The exact names of these classes is explicitly unspecified.
\IfYouWantClass {a} {transformation} {transformation}

All of the instantiable transformation classes provided by CLIM are immutable.

\Defpredicate {transformationp} {object}

Returns \term{true} if \arg{object} is a \term{transformation}, otherwise
returns \term{false}.

\Defconst {+identity-transformation+}

An instance of a transformation that is guaranteed to be an identity
transformation, that is, the transformation that ``does nothing''.


\subsection {Transformation Conditions}

\Deferror {transformation-error}

The class that is the superclass of the following three conditions.  This class
is a subclass of \cl{error}.

\Deferror {transformation-underspecified}

The error that is signalled when \cl{make-3-point-transformation} is given three
collinear image points.  This condition will handle the \cl{:points} initarg,
which is used to supply the points that are in error.

\Deferror {reflection-underspecified}

The error that is signalled when \cl{make-reflection-transformation} is given
two coincident points.  This condition will handle the \cl{:points} initarg,
which is used to supply the points that are in error.

\Deferror {singular-transformation}

The error that is signalled when \cl{invert-transformation} is called on a
singular transformation, that is, a transformation that has no inverse.  This
condition will handle the \cl{:transformation} initarg, which is used to supply
the transformation that is singular.


\section {Transformation Constructors}

The following transformation constructors do not capture any of their inputs.
The constructors all create objects that are subclasses of \cl{transformation}.

\Defun {make-translation-transformation} {translation-x translation-y} 

A translation is a transformation that preserves length, angle, and orientation
of all geometric entities.

\cl{make-translation-transformation} returns a transformation that translates
all points by \arg{translation-x} in the $x$ direction and \arg{translation-y}
in the $y$ direction.  \arg{translation-x} and \arg{translation-y} must be real
numbers.


\defun {make-rotation-transformation}  {angle \optional origin}
\Defun {make-rotation-transformation*} {angle \optional origin-x origin-y}

A rotation is a transformation that preserves length and angles of all geometric
entities.  Rotations also preserve one point (the origin) and the distance of
all entities from that point.

\cl{make-rotation-transformation} returns a transformation that rotates all
points by \arg{angle} (which is a real number indicating an angle in radians)
around the point \arg{origin}.  If \arg{origin} is supplied it must be a point;
if not supplied it defaults to $(0,0)$.  \arg{origin-x} and \arg{origin-y} must
be real numbers, and default to $0$.

\defun {make-scaling-transformation}  {scale-x scale-y \optional origin} 
\Defun {make-scaling-transformation*} {scale-x scale-y \optional origin-x origin-y} 

There is no single definition of a scaling transformation.  Transformations that
preserve all angles and multiply all lengths by the same factor (preserving the
``shape'' of all entities) are certainly scaling transformations.  However,
scaling is also used to refer to transformations that scale distances in the $x$
direction by one amount and distances in the $y$ direction by another amount.

\cl{make-scaling-transformation} returns a transformation that multiplies the
$x$-coordinate distance of every point from \arg{origin} by \arg{scale-x} and
the $y$-coordinate distance of every point from \arg{origin} by \arg{scale-y}.
\arg{scale-x} and \arg{scale-y} must be real numbers.  If \arg{origin} is
supplied it must be a point; if not supplied it defaults to $(0,0)$.
\arg{origin-x} and \arg{origin-y} must be real numbers, and default to $0$.


\defun {make-reflection-transformation}  {point1 point2}
\Defun {make-reflection-transformation*} {x1 y1 x2 y2}

A reflection is a transformation that preserves lengths and magnitudes of
angles, but changes the sign (or ``handedness'') of angles.  If you think of the
drawing plane on a transparent sheet of paper, a reflection is a transformation
that ``turns the paper over''.

\cl{make-reflection-transformation} returns a transformation that reflects every
point through the line passing through the \term{points} \arg{point1} and
\arg{point2} (or through the positions $(x1,y1)$ and $(x2,y2)$ in the case of
the spread version).


\Defun {make-transformation} {mxx mxy myx myy tx ty}

Returns a general transformation whose effect is:
\begin{eqnarray*}
  x^\prime =& m_{xx} x + m_{xy} y + t_x \\
  y^\prime =& m_{yx} x + m_{yy} y + t_y
\end{eqnarray*}
where $x$ and $y$ are the coordinates of a point before the transformation and
$x^\prime$ and $y^\prime$ are the coordinates of the corresponding point after.

All of the arguments to \cl{make-transformation} must be real numbers.


\Defun {make-3-point-transformation} {point-1 point-2 point-3 point-1-image point-2-image point-3-image}

Returns a transformation that takes \arg{point-1} into
\arg{point-1-image}, \arg{point-2} into \arg{point-2-image} and \arg{point-3}
into \arg{point-3-image}.  Three non-collinear points and their images under the
transformation are enough to specify any affine transformation.

If \arg{point-1}, \arg{point-2} and \arg{point-3} are collinear, the
\cl{transformation-underspecified} error will be signalled.  If
\arg{point-1-image}, \arg{point-2-image} and \arg{point-3-image} are collinear,
the resulting transformation will be singular (that is, will have no inverse)
but this is not an error.


\Defun {make-3-point-transformation*} {x1 y1 x2 y2 x3 y3 x1-image y1-image x2-image y2-image x3-image y3-image}

Returns a transformation that takes the points at the positions
(\arg{x1},\arg{y1}) into (\arg{x1-image},\arg{y1-image}), (\arg{x2},\arg{y2})
into (\arg{x2-image},\arg{y2-image}) and (\arg{x3},\arg{y3}) into
(\arg{x3-image},\arg{y3-image}).  Three non-collinear points and their images
under the transformation are enough to specify any affine transformation.

If the positions $(x1,y1)$, $(x2,y2)$ and $(x3,y3)$ are collinear, the
\cl{transformation-underspecified} error will be signalled.  If
(\arg{x1-image},\arg{y1-image}), (\arg{x2-image},\arg{y2-image}), and
(\arg{x3-image},\arg{y3-image}) are collinear, the resulting transformation will
be singular but this is not an error.

This is the spread version of \cl{make-3-point-transformation}.


\section {The Transformation Protocol}

The following subsections describe the transformation protocol.  All classes
that are subclasses of \cl{transformation} must implement methods for all of
the generic functions in the following subsections.


\subsection {Transformation Predicates}

In all of the functions below, the argument named \arg{transformation} must be a
transformation.

\Defgeneric {transformation-equal} {transformation1 transformation2} 

Returns \term{true} if the two \term{transformations} \arg{transformation1} and
\arg{transformation2} have equivalent effects (that is, are mathematically
equal), otherwise returns \term{false}.

Implementations are encouraged to allow transformations that are not numerically
equal due to floating-point roundoff errors to be \cl{transformation-equal}.  An
appropriate level of ``fuzziness'' is \cl{single-float-epsilon}, or some small
multiple of \cl{single-float-epsilon}.


\Defgeneric {identity-transformation-p} {transformation} 

Returns \term{true} if the \term{transformation} \arg{transformation} is equal
(in the sense of \cl{transformation-equal}) to the identity transformation,
otherwise returns \term{false}.

\Defgeneric {invertible-transformation-p} {transformation} 

Returns \term{true} if the \term{transformation} \arg{transformation} has an
inverse, otherwise returns \term{false}.

\Defgeneric {translation-transformation-p} {transformation}

Returns \term{true} if the \term{transformation} \arg{transformation} is a pure
translation, that is, a transformation such that there are two distance
components $dx$ and $dy$ and every point $(x,y)$ is moved to $(x+dx,y+dy)$.
Otherwise, \cl{translation-transformation-p} returns \term{false}.

\Defgeneric {reflection-transformation-p} {transformation}

Returns \term{true} if the \term{transformation} \arg{transformation} inverts
the ``handedness'' of the coordinate system, otherwise returns \term{false}.
Note that this is a very inclusive category---transformations are considered
reflections even if they distort, scale, or skew the coordinate system, as long
as they invert the handedness.

\Defgeneric {rigid-transformation-p} {transformation}

Returns \term{true} if the \term{transformation} \arg{transformation} transforms
the coordinate system as a rigid object, that is, as a combination of
translations, rotations, and pure reflections.  Otherwise, it returns
\term{false}.

Rigid transformations are the most general category of transformations that
preserve magnitudes of all lengths and angles.

\Defgeneric {even-scaling-transformation-p} {transformation}

Returns \term{true} if the \term{transformation} \arg{transformation} multiplies
all $x$ lengths and $y$ lengths by the same magnitude, otherwise returns
\term{false}.  It does include pure reflections through vertical and horizontal
lines.

\Defgeneric {scaling-transformation-p} {transformation}

Returns \term{true} if the \term{transformation} \arg{transformation} multiplies
all $x$ lengths by one magnitude and all $y$ lengths by another magnitude,
otherwise returns \term{false}.  This category includes even scalings as a
subset.

\Defgeneric {rectilinear-transformation-p} {transformation}

Returns \term{true} if the \term{transformation} \arg{transformation} will
always transform any axis-aligned rectangle into another axis-aligned rectangle,
otherwise returns \term{false}.  This category includes scalings as a subset,
and also includes 90 degree rotations.

Rectilinear transformations are the most general category of transformations for
which the bounding rectangle of a transformed object can be found by
transforming the bounding rectangle of the original object.

\issue {SWM} {Supply this figure.}

\begin{figure}
\centerline{To be supplied.}
\caption{The predicates for analyzing the mathematical properties of a transformation.}  
\end{figure}


\subsection {Composition of Transformations}

If we transform from one coordinate system to another, then from the second to a
third coordinate system, we can regard the resulting transformation as a single
transformation resulting from \concept{composing} the two component
transformations.  It is an important and useful property of affine transformations
that they are closed under composition.  Note that composition is not commutative;
in general, the result of applying transformation $A$ and then applying
transformation $B$ is not the same as applying $B$ first, then $A$.

Any arbitrary transformation can be built up by composing a number of simpler
transformations, but that composition is not unique.

\Defgeneric {compose-transformations} {transformation1 transformation2}

Returns a transformation that is the mathematical composition of its arguments.
Composition is in right-to-left order, that is, the resulting transformation
represents the effects of applying the \term{transformation}
\arg{transformation2} followed by the \term{transformation}
\arg{transformation1}.

\Defgeneric {invert-transformation} {transformation}

Returns a transformation that is the inverse of the \term{transformation}
\arg{transformation}.  The result of composing a transformation with its inverse
is equal to the identity transformation.

If \arg{transformation} is singular, \cl{invert-transformation} will signal the
\cl{singular-transformation} error, with a named restart that is invoked with a
transformation and makes \cl{invert-transformation} return that transformation.
This is to allow a drawing application, for example, to use a generalized
inverse to transform a region through a singular transformation.

Note that with finite-precision arithmetic there are several low-level
conditions that might occur during the attempt to invert a singular or ``almost
singular'' transformation.  (These include computation of a zero determinant,
floating-point underflow during computation of the determinant, or
floating-point overflow during subsequent multiplication.)
\cl{invert-transformation} must signal the \cl{singular-transformation} error
for all of these cases.

\defun {compose-translation-with-transformation} {transformation dx dy}
\defun {compose-scaling-with-transformation}     {transformation sx sy \optional origin}
\Defun {compose-rotation-with-transformation}    {transformation angle \optional origin} 

These functions create a new transformation by composing the
\term{transformation} \arg{transformation} with a given translation, scaling, or
rotation, respectively.  The order of composition is that the translation,
scaling, or rotation ``transformation'' is first, followed by
\arg{transformation}.

\arg{dx} and \arg{dy} are as for \cl{make-translation-transformation}.
\arg{sx}, \arg{sy}, and \arg{origin} are as for \cl{make-scaling-transformation}.
\arg{angle} and \arg{origin} are as for \cl{make-rotation-transformation}.

Note that these functions could be implemented by using the various constructors
and \cl{compose-transformations}.  They are provided, because it is common to
build up a transformation as a series of simple transformations.


\defun {compose-transformation-with-translation} {transformation dx dy}
\defun {compose-transformation-with-scaling}     {transformation sx sy \optional origin}
\Defun {compose-transformation-with-rotation}    {transformation angle \optional origin} 

These functions create a new transformation by composing a given translation,
scaling, or rotation, respectively, with the \term{transformation}
\arg{transformation}.  The order of composition is \arg{transformation} is
first, followed by the translation, scaling, or rotation ``transformation''.

\arg{dx} and \arg{dy} are as for \cl{make-translation-transformation}.
\arg{sx}, \arg{sy}, and \arg{origin} are as for \cl{make-scaling-transformation}.
\arg{angle} and \arg{origin} are as for \cl{make-rotation-transformation}.

Note that these functions could be implemented by using the various constructors
and \cl{compose-transformations}.  They are provided, because it is common to
build up a transformation as a series of simple transformations.


\subsection {Applying Transformations}

Transforming a region applies a coordinate transformation to that region, thus
moving its position on the drawing plane, rotating it, or scaling it.  Note that
transforming a region does not side-effect the \arg{region} argument; it is free
to either create a new region or return an existing (cached) region.

These generic functions must be implemented for all classes of transformations.
Furthermore, all subclasses of \cl{region} and \cl{design} must implement
methods for \cl{transform-region} and \cl{untransform-region}.  That is, methods
for the following generic functions will typically specialize both the
\arg{transformation} and \term{region} arguments.

Note that, if the extended region classes are not implemented, the following
functions are not closed, that is, they may return results that are not CLIM
regions.


\Defgeneric {transform-region} {transformation region}

Applies \arg{transformation} to the \term{region} \arg{region}, and returns the
transformed region.

\Defgeneric {untransform-region} {transformation region}

This is exactly equivalent to \\
\verb+(transform-region (invert-transformation+ \arg{transformation}\verb+)+
\arg{region}\verb+)+ .

CLIM provides a default method for \cl{untransform-region} on the
\cl{transformation} protocol class that does exactly this.


\Defgeneric {transform-position} {transformation x y}

Applies the \term{transformation} \arg{transformation} to the point whose
coordinates are the real numbers \arg{x} and \arg{y}, and returns two values,
the transformed $x$ coordinate and the transformed $y$ coordinate.

\cl{transform-position} is the spread version of \cl{transform-region} in the
case where the region is a point.

\Defgeneric {untransform-position} {transformation x y}

This is exactly equivalent to \\
\verb+(transform-position (invert-transformation+ \arg{transformation}\verb+)+
\arg{x} \arg{y}\verb+)+ .

CLIM provides a default method for \cl{untransform-position} on the
\cl{transformation} protocol class that does exactly this.


\Defgeneric {transform-distance} {transformation dx dy}

Applies the \term{transformation} \arg{transformation} to the distance
represented by the real numbers \arg{dx} and \arg{dy}, and returns two values,
the transformed \arg{dx} and the transformed \arg{dy}.

A distance represents the difference between two points.  It does {\sl not}
transform like a point.

\Defgeneric {untransform-distance} {transformation dx dy} 

This is exactly equivalent to \\
\verb+(transform-distance (invert-transformation+ \arg{transformation}\verb+)+
\arg{dx} \arg{dy}\verb+)+ .

CLIM provides a default method for \cl{untransform-distance} on the
\cl{transformation} protocol class that does exactly this.


\Defgeneric {transform-rectangle*} {transformation x1 y1 x2 y2}

Applies the \term{transformation} \arg{transformation} to the rectangle
specified by the four coordinate arguments, which are real numbers.  The
arguments \arg{x1}, \arg{y1}, \arg{x2}, and \arg{y2} are canonicalized in the
same way as for \cl{make-bounding-rectangle}.  Returns four values that specify
the minimum and maximum points of the transformed rectangle in the order
\arg{min-x}, \arg{min-y}, \arg{max-x}, and \arg{max-y}.

It is an error is \arg{transformation} does not satisfy
\cl{rectilinear-transformation-p}.

\cl{transform-rectangle*} is the spread version of \cl{transform-region} in the
case where the transformation is rectilinear and the region is a rectangle.

\Defgeneric {untransform-rectangle*} {transformation x1 y1 x2 y2}

This is exactly equivalent to \\
\verb+(transform-rectangle* (invert-transformation+ \arg{transformation}\verb+)+
\arg{x1} \arg{y1} \arg{x2} \arg{y2}\verb+)+ .

CLIM provides a default method for \cl{untransform-rectangle*} on the
\cl{transformation} protocol class that does exactly this.
