@anchor{Class drei:drei-view}
@deftp {Class} {drei:drei-view}
@tindex drei:drei-view
Class precedence list: @code{@w{drei-view}, @w{tabify-mixin}, @w{subscriptable-name-mixin}, @w{name-mixin}, @w{standard-object}, @w{slot-object}, @w{t}}

Slots:
@itemize
@item @code{%active} --- initargs: @code{@w{:active}}

A boolean value indicating whether
the view is "active". This should control highlighting when
redisplaying.
@item @code{%modified-p} --- initargs: @code{@w{:modified-p}}

This value is true if the view
contents have been modified since the last time this value was
set to false.
@item @code{%no-cursors} --- initargs: @code{@w{:no-cursors}}

True if the view does not display
cursors.
@item @code{%full-redisplay-p} 

True if the view should be
fully redisplayed the next time it is redisplayed.
@item @code{%use-editor-commands} --- initargs: @code{@w{:use-editor-commands}}

If the view is supposed
to support standard editor commands (for inserting objects,
moving cursor, etc), this will be true. If you want your view to
support standard editor commands, you should *not* inherit from
@code{editor-table} @code{-} the command tables containing the editor
commands will be added automatically, as long as this value is
true.
@item @code{%extend-pane-bottom} --- initargs: @code{@w{:extend-pane-bottom}}

Resize the output pane
vertically during redisplay (using @code{change-space-requirements}),
in order to fit the whole buffer. If this value is false,
redisplay will stop when the bottom of the pane is reached.
@end itemize

The base class for all Drei views. A view
observes some other object and provides a visual representation
for Drei.
@end deftp
