@anchor{Class drei:drei}
@deftp {Class} {drei:drei}
@tindex drei:drei
Class precedence list: @code{@w{drei}, @w{standard-object}, @w{slot-object}, @w{t}}

Slots:
@itemize
@item @code{%view} --- initargs: @code{@w{:view}}

The CLIM view that will be used
whenever this Drei is being displayed. During redisplay, the
@code{stream-default-view} of the output stream will be temporarily
bound to this value.
@item @code{%previous-command} 

The previous CLIM command
executed by this Drei instance. May be NIL if no command has been
executed.
@item @code{%editor-pane} --- initargs: @code{@w{:editor-pane}}

The stream or pane that the Drei
instance will perform output to.
@item @code{%minibuffer} --- initargs: @code{@w{:minibuffer}}

The minibuffer pane (or null)
associated with the Drei instance. This may be NIL.
@item @code{%command-table} --- initargs: @code{@w{:command-table}}

The command table used for
looking up commands for the Drei instance. Has a sensible
default, don't override it unless you know what you are doing.
@item @code{%cursors} 

A list of which cursors are
associated with the Drei instance. During redisplay,
@code{display-drei-view-cursor} is called on each element of this
list.
@item @code{%point-cursor} 

The cursor object that is
considered the primary user-oriented cursor, most probably the
cursor for the editor point. Note that this cursor is also in the
cursors-list.
@item @code{%cursors-visible} --- initargs: @code{@w{:cursors-visible}}

If true, the cursors of this
Drei instance will be visible. If false, they will not.
@end itemize

The abstract Drei class that maintains
standard Drei editor state. It should not be directly
instantiated, a subclass implementing specific behavior (a Drei
variant) should be used instead.
@end deftp
