@anchor{Class drei:drei-buffer-view}
@deftp {Class} {drei:drei-buffer-view}
@tindex drei:drei-buffer-view
Class precedence list: @code{@w{drei-buffer-view}, @w{drei-view}, @w{tabify-mixin}, @w{subscriptable-name-mixin}, @w{name-mixin}, @w{standard-object}, @w{slot-object}, @w{t}}

Slots:
@itemize
@item @code{%buffer} --- initargs: @code{@w{:buffer}}

The buffer that is observed by this
buffer view.
@item @code{%top} 

The top of the displayed buffer, that
is, the mark indicating the first visible object in the buffer.
@item @code{%bot} 

The bottom of the displayed buffer, that
is, the mark indicating the last visible object in the buffer.
@item @code{%cache-string} 

A string used during redisplay
to reduce consing. Instead of consing up a new string every time
we need to pull out a buffer region, we put it in this
string. The fill pointer is automatically set to zero whenever
the string is accessed through the reader.
@item @code{%displayed-lines} 

An array of the
@code{displayed-line} objects displayed by the view. Not all of these
are live.
@item @code{%displayed-lines-count} 

The number of lines in
the views @code{displayed-lines} array that are actually live, that
is, used for display right now.
@item @code{%max-line-width} 

The width of the longest
displayed line in device units.
@item @code{%lines} 

The lines of the buffer, stored in a
format that makes it easy to retrieve information about them.
@item @code{%lines-prefix} 

The number of unchanged
objects at the start of the buffer since the list of lines was
last updated.
@item @code{%lines-suffix} 

The number of unchanged objects
at the end of the buffer since since the list of lines was last
updated.
@item @code{%last-seen-buffer-size} 

The buffer size the
last time a change to the buffer was registered.
@end itemize

A view that contains a @code{drei-buffer}
object. The buffer is displayed on a simple line-by-line basis,
with top and bot marks delimiting the visible region. These marks
are automatically set if applicable.
@end deftp
