@node Developer manual
@chapter Developer manual

@menu
* Coding conventions::
* Writing backends::
* PostScript backend::
@end menu

@node Coding conventions
@section Coding conventions

In the @mcclim{} codebase, we try to follow certain coding conventions
for consistency and better maintainability.  We default to conventions
mentioned in the @url{http://bauhh.dyndns.org:8000/clim-spec/2.html,
specification} and to the
@url{http://www.cs.umd.edu/~nau/cmsc421/norvig-lisp-style.pdf, usual
conventions}.  The conventions described in the following sections cover
aspects not discussed in these documents.

@subsection Packages

In addition to the packages mentioned in the specification, @mcclim{}
defines the packages @code{clim-extensions} and @code{clim-backend}.
Both are used by the @code{clim-internals} package to avoid conflicts.

@code{clim-extensions} (which has the nickname @code{clime}) exports all
extensions provided by @mcclim. While each extension may define its own
package for implementation purposes, application programmers should
access symbols only via the @code{clim-extensions} package.

@code{clim-backend} (which has the nickname @code{climb}) exports
symbols which are intended for use by backend writers.  It uses the
packages @code{clim} and @code{clim-extensions}.

@subsection Examples

Examples and demos which are distributed with @mcclim{} are loaded from
a separate system named @code{clim-examples}.  Each example should be
put either directly in the package @code{clim-demo} or live in its own
package the name of which should be start with @code{clim-demo.}, for
instance @code{clim-demo.foobar-example}.

@node Writing backends
@section Writing backends

@menu
* Different types of backends::
* Backend protocol::
* Event handling::
* Graft protocol::
* Medium drawing::
* Medium operations::
* Port protocol::
* Frame manager::
* Pointer protocol (events?)::
* Text size::
* Additional output destinations::
* Miscellaneous::
* Obsolete::
@end menu

@node Different types of backends
@subsection Different types of backends

Backend provides platform specific API for low level drawing
operations, getting events, managing window geometry properties and
providing native look-and-feel to the application.

There are three types of backends:

@table @asis
@item Draw-only backend

This type doesn't implement any kind of events and allows only drawing
on it. A good example of it is the @xref{PostScript backend} which is
part of @emph{@clim{} II} specification.

@item Basic backend

OpenGL, X, or HTML 5 canvas are resources which provide only drawing and
event handling primitives. In this case we need to wrap their APIs
for @mcclim{} to use. @mcclim{} will then use these drawing and windowing
primitives to implement portable widgets.

@item Native backend

Native backend is based on already complete GUI library which provides
a rich set of widgets (for example Cocoa or Win32 API). Additionally
to the things needed to be implement in the first two cases, we can
also map these native look and feel widgets in @mcclim{}.
@end table

The @class{clim-null} backend can be used as a template to start with a
new backend.  If the underlying library you write backend for manages
window hierarchy, positioning and events, it is possible to base new
pane types on @code{mirrored-sheet-mixin} class which provides native
handles into native windowing system.  Mirrored and ``native lisp''
sheets may be freely mixed in the pane hierarchy.

@node Backend protocol
@subsection Backend protocol

@verbatim
NEW CLASS FOR BACKEND `FOO'
---------------------------
foo-frame-manager
foo-native-frame-manager (optional)
foo-graft
foo-port
foo-medium
foo-pointer
@end verbatim

@node Event handling
@subsection Event handling

@verbatim
EVENT HANDLING (in port.lisp)
-----------------------------
;;; Originally in CLIM-INTERNALS
port-frame-keyboard-input-focus
synthesize-pointer-motion-event
@end verbatim

@node Graft protocol
@subsection Graft protocol

@verbatim
GRAFT (in grafts.lisp)
-----------------------------------
;;; Originally in CLIM
graft        ; root window/screen
graft-height ; screen height
graft-width  ; screen width
@end verbatim

@node Medium drawing
@subsection Medium drawing

@verbatim
MEDIUM DRAWING (in medium.lisp)
-------------------------------
;;; Originally in CLIM
medium-draw-circle*
medium-draw-ellipse*
medium-draw-line*
medium-draw-lines*
medium-draw-point*
medium-draw-points*
medium-draw-polygon*
medium-draw-rectangle*
medium-draw-rectangles*
medium-draw-text*
@end verbatim

@node Medium operations
@subsection Medium operation

@verbatim
MEDIUM OPERATIONS (in medium.lisp)
----------------------------------
;;; Originally in CLIM
make-medium ; make medium for a given sheet
medium-beep
medium-buffering-output-p
medium-clear-area
medium-copy-area
medium-finish-output
medium-force-output
medium-line-style
medium-text-style
@end verbatim

@node Port protocol
@subsection Port protocol

@verbatim
PORT (BRIDGE) TO GUI (A SERVER LIKE)
------------------------------------
;;; Originally in CLIM
destroy-port

;;; Originally in CLIM-INTERNALS
port-allocate-pixmap
port-deallocate-pixmap
port-disable-sheet
port-enable-sheet
port-force-output
port-set-mirror-region
port-set-mirror-transformation
set-sheet-pointer-cursor
port-set-mirror-name
@end verbatim

@node Frame manager
@subsection Frame manager, panes and gadgets

@verbatim
FRAME MANAGER, PANES AND GADGETS
--------------------------------
;;; Originally in CLIM
;; in frame-manager.lisp
make-pane-1
note-space-requirements-changed
adopt-frame

;; in port.lisp or pane.lisp/gadget.lisp
allocate-space
destroy-mirror
handle-repaint
realize-mirror
@end verbatim

@node Pointer protocol (events?)
@subsection Pointer protocol (events?)

@verbatim
POINTER (port.lisp or pointer.lisp)
-----------------------------------
;;; Originally in CLIM
pointer-button-state
pointer-modifier-state
pointer-position
@end verbatim

@node Text size
@subsection Text size

@verbatim
TEXT SIZE (medium.lisp)
-----------------------
;;; Originally in CLIM-INTERNALS
text-style-character-width
;;; Originally in CLIM
text-size
text-style-ascent
text-style-descent
text-style-height
text-style-mapping
text-style-width
@end verbatim

@node Additional output destinations
@subsection Additional output destinations

A backend implementation may register additional output destination
types for the @cl{:output-destination} keyword parameter accepted by
some commands.  Doing so allows the command to be invoked with
@cl{*standard-output*} bound to a stream provided by the backend that
redirects the command's output to a non-default destination such as a
vector graphics or raster image file.

To support this protocol in a backend, three things are required:

@enumerate
@item
A new output destination class (usually a subclass of
@class{clim-backend:output-destination} or one of its subclasses).

@item
A method on @genfunref{clim-backend:invoke-with-standard-output}
specialized to the new output destination class.

@item
A call to @funref{clim-backend:register-output-destination-type} in
order to register the new output destination.
@end enumerate

@include docstrings/fun-clim-backend-invoke-with-standard-output.texi

@include docstrings/fun-clim-backend-register-output-destination-type.texi

@node Miscellaneous
@subsection Miscellaneous

@verbatim
MISC
----
;;; Originally in CLIM-EXTENSIONS
medium-miter-limit          ; determine a draw for miter < sina/2
@end verbatim

@node Obsolete
@subsection Obsolete

@verbatim
NO LONGER NEEDED IN BACKEND
---------------------------
queue-callback                  ; moved to clim-core
medium-clipping-                ; moved to clim-basic
mirror-transformation           ; never used
@end verbatim

@node PostScript backend
@section PostScript backend

@menu
* Postscript fonts::
* Additional functions::
@end menu

@node Postscript fonts
@subsection Postscript fonts

Font mapping is a cons, the car of which is the name of the font
(FontName field in the AFM file), and the cdr is the size in points.
Before establishing the mapping, an information about this font should
be loaded with the function @cl{load-afm-file}.

@node Additional functions
@subsection Additional functions

Package @cl{clim-postscript} exports the following functions:

@deffn {Function} {load-afm-file} afm-filename
@end deffn

Loads a description of a font from the specified AFM file.
