@node Extensions
@chapter Extensions

@menu
* Frame and sheet names::
* Text editor substrate::
* Extended text formatting::
* Tab Layout::
* Fonts and Extended Text Styles::
* Raster Images::
@end menu

@node Frame and sheet names
@section Frame and sheet names

According to the @clim specification, a frame has a name and a pretty
name the latter of which can be changed. @mcclim extends this design to
top-level sheets in form of the following protocol:

@include docstrings/fun-clim-extensions-sheet-name.texi
@include docstrings/fun-clim-extensions-sheet-pretty-name.texi
@include docstrings/fun-clim-extensions-setf-sheet-pretty-name.texi

The class @code{clim-extensions:top-level-sheet-mixin} can be added as a
superclass to sheet classes that implement the above protocol. Otherwise
default methods on @code{clim-extensions:sheet-name} and
@code{clim-extensions:sheet-pretty-name} return @t{nil} and @t{"(Unnamed
sheet)"} respectively.

Furthermore @mcclim provides a way for clients to be notified when the
pretty name of frame changes:

@include docstrings/fun-clim-extensions-note-frame-pretty-name-changed.texi

@node Text editor substrate
@section Text editor substrate
@cindex drei
@cindex input-editor
@cindex text-editor
@cindex text-field

For brievity only basic topics common to all substrates are covered in
the manual. Drei documentation is provided as a separate document.

@menu
* Text field gadget::
* Text editor pane::
@end menu

@node Text field gadget
@node Text editor pane

@node Extended text formatting
@section Extended text formatting

@code{standard-extended-output-stream} has been extended by protocols
complementary to already defined ones. Some were clearly missing given
how it is specified - like margins and word wrap. Some are useful in
contemporary text displaying applications like text direction and
alignment.

@subsection Page abstraction

@anchor{Function clime:page-initial-position}
@anchor{Function clime:page-final-position}
@deffn {Function} {@symbol{page-initial-position,clime}} stream
@deffnx {Function} {@symbol{page-final-position,clime}} stream
Both functions return two values, x and y coordinates of the respective
position.  Initial position is where the cursor is placed on a fresh
page, and the final position is where the cursor is placed right before
the page ends.  Coordinates depend on current margins and text
alignment.
@end deffn

@anchor{Function clime:stream-page-region}
@deffn {Function} {@symbol{stream-page-region,clime}} stream
This function returns a region which corresponds to the stream page
format.  This region corresponds the stream margins.
@end deffn

@anchor{Macro clime:with-temporary-margins}
@deffn {Macro} {@symbol{with-temporary-margins,clime}} (stream &key (move-cursor t) left right top bottom) &body body
Execute @var{body} in a dynamic environment where @var{stream}'s
margins are augmented with @var{left}, @var{right}, @var{top} and
@var{bottom}.  Not all margins have to be specified.  If they are not
current margin values are taken as defaults.

Each margin must be in one of following formats: @code{(:relative
@var{space})} or @code{(:absolute @var{space})}.  @var{space} may be
specified as for @code{:x-spacing} and @code{:y-spacing} for horizontal
and vertical margins accordingly.  If a margin is ``absolute'' then it
corresponds to its exact placement in stream coordinates.  ``relative''
margins are relative to the stream viewport region.

If the Boolean @var{move-cursor} is @code{T} then the cursor is left
where it was placed after the last operation.  Otherwise upon completion
of @var{body}, the cursor position is restored to its previous value.

Programmers using @code{clime:with-temporary-margins} should begin
@var{body} with a call to the function
@code{clim:stream-set-cursor-position} which will set the cursor to
@code{clime:page-initial-position}.
@end deffn

@subsection FILLING-OUTPUT extension

The macro @code{clim:filling-output} behaves the same as before with a
few additions:

@code{:after-line-break-subsequent} is complementary to
@code{:after-line-break-initially}, it decides whether
@code{:after-line-break} is printed for lines after the first
break.  It defaults to @code{T}.

@code{:after-line-break-composed} decides whether
@code{after-line-break} from the external @code{filling-output} should
be called as well (defaults to @code{T}).

@code{:after-line-break} may be a string or a function accepting two
arguments: a stream and a flag indicating whether it is a soft newline
or not.  The function will be executed conditionally depending on values
of @code{:after-line-break-initially} and
@code{:after-line-break-subsequent} flags.

The macro preserves a @code{text-style}, @code{ink} and indentation from
state in which it was invoked.  That means in particular that
@code{indenting-output} may be called from inside @code{filling-output}
and @code{after-line-break} will be printed without this indent.

@node Tab Layout
@section Tab Layout

The tab layout is a composite pane arranging its children so that
exactly one child is visible at any time, with a row of buttons
allowing the user to choose between them.

See also the @file{tabdemo.lisp} example code located under
@file{Examples} in the @mcclim distribution.  It can be started using
@code{(clim-demo:demodemo)}.

@include class-clim-tab-layout-tab-layout.texi
@include class-clim-tab-layout-tab-layout-pane.texi
@include class-clim-tab-layout-tab-page.texi
@include macro-clim-tab-layout-with-tab-layout.texi

@include fun-clim-tab-layout-tab-layout-pages.texi

@include fun-clim-tab-layout-tab-page-tab-layout.texi
@include fun-clim-tab-layout-tab-page-title.texi
@include fun-clim-tab-layout-tab-page-pane.texi
@include fun-clim-tab-layout-tab-page-presentation-type.texi
@include fun-clim-tab-layout-tab-page-drawing-options.texi

@include fun-clim-tab-layout-add-page.texi
@include fun-clim-tab-layout-remove-page.texi
@include fun-clim-tab-layout-tab-layout-enabled-page.texi
@include fun-clim-tab-layout-sheet-to-page.texi
@include fun-clim-tab-layout-find-tab-page-named.texi
@include fun-clim-tab-layout-switch-to-page.texi
@include fun-clim-tab-layout-remove-page-named.texi

@include fun-clim-tab-layout-note-tab-page-changed.texi

@c com-switch-to-tab-page
@c com-remove-tab-page

@node Fonts and Extended Text Styles
@section Fonts and Extended Text Styles

@menu
* Extended Text Styles::
* Listing Fonts::
@end menu

@node Extended Text Styles
@subsection Extended Text Styles

@mcclim extends the legal values for the @cl{family} and @cl{face}
arguments to @cl{make-text-style} to include strings (in additional to
the portable keyword symbols), as permitted by the @clim spec, section
11.1.

Each backend defines its own specific syntax for these family and face
names.

The CLX backend maps the text style family to the X font's
@emph{foundry} and @emph{family} values, separated by a dash.  The
face is mapped to @emph{weight} and @emph{slant} in the same way.  For
example, the following form creates a text style for
@emph{-misc-fixed-bold-r-*-*-18-*-*-*-*-*-*-*}:

@lisp
(make-text-style "misc-fixed" "bold-r" 18)
@end lisp

In the GTK backend, the text style family and face are used directly
as the Pango font family and face name.  Please refer to Pango
documentation for details on the syntax of face names.  Example:

@lisp
(make-text-style "Bitstream Vera Sans" "Bold Oblique" 54)
@end lisp

@node Listing Fonts
@subsection Listing Fonts

@mcclim's font listing functions allow applications to list all
available fonts available on a @class{port} and create text style
instances for them.

Example:

@lisp
* (find "Bitstream Vera Sans Mono"
        (clim-extensions:port-all-font-families (clim:find-port))
        :key #'clim-extensions:font-family-name
        :test #'equal)
#<CLIM-GTKAIRO::PANGO-FONT-FAMILY Bitstream Vera Sans Mono>

* (clim-extensions:font-family-all-faces *)
(#<CLIM-GTKAIRO::PANGO-FONT-FACE Bitstream Vera Sans Mono, Bold>
 #<CLIM-GTKAIRO::PANGO-FONT-FACE Bitstream Vera Sans Mono, Bold Oblique>
 #<CLIM-GTKAIRO::PANGO-FONT-FACE Bitstream Vera Sans Mono, Oblique>
 #<CLIM-GTKAIRO::PANGO-FONT-FACE Bitstream Vera Sans Mono, Roman>)

* (clim-extensions:font-face-scalable-p (car *))
T

* (clim-extensions:font-face-text-style (car **) 50)
#<CLIM:STANDARD-TEXT-STYLE "Bitstream Vera Sans Mono" "Bold" 50>
@end lisp

@include class-clim-extensions-font-family.texi
@include class-clim-extensions-font-face.texi

@include fun-clim-extensions-port-all-font-families.texi

@include fun-clim-extensions-font-family-name.texi
@include fun-clim-extensions-font-family-port.texi
@include fun-clim-extensions-font-family-all-faces.texi

@include fun-clim-extensions-font-face-name.texi
@include fun-clim-extensions-font-face-family.texi
@include fun-clim-extensions-font-face-all-sizes.texi
@include fun-clim-extensions-font-face-text-style.texi

@node Raster Images
@section Raster Images

This extension has the goal to provide a fast and flexible way to
display images in the screen. An image is a rectangular object and is
represented as a rectangular pattern and follows pattern
protocol. Pixel values are represented as 32-bit RGBA numbers.

collapse-pattern
make-pattern-from-bitmap-file

define-bitmap-file-reader
define-bitmap-file-writer
bitmap-format-supported-p
bitmap-output-supported-p
read-bitmap-file
write-bitmap-file

Images are read with @code{read-bitmap-file}.
Images are wrote with @code{write-bitmap-file}.

Images are created with @code{make-image}.
Images are cloned with @code{clone-image}.
Images are copied with @code{copy-image}.
Images are blended with @code{blend-image}.
Images are filled with @code{fill-image}.

Operations having source and destination image as arguments may use
the same image without copying it.

To draw an image use @code{draw-pattern*} or @code{draw-design}. Image
may be also used as an ink in other drawing functions.

@section Raster image as a medium

Raster image backend includes a medium that implements:
@itemize @bullet
@item @clim's medium protocol,
@item @clim's output stream protocol, and
@item @clim's Pixmap protocol.
@end itemize

@anchor{Macro clime:with-output-to-image-stream}
@deffn {Macro} {@symbol{with-output-to-image-stream,clime}} (stream-var file-stream format &rest options) &body body
@end deffn

@anchor{Macro clime:with-output-to-rgba-pattern}
@deffn {Macro} {@symbol{with-output-to-rgba-pattern,clime}} (stream-var image &rest options) &body body
@end deffn

Within @code{body}, @code{stream-var} is bound to a stream that produces
a raster image.  This stream is suitable as a stream or medium argument
to any @clim output utility, such as @code{draw-line*} or
@code{write-string}.

The value of @code{options} is a list consisting of alternating keyword and value
pairs.  These are the supported keywords:
@itemize @bullet
@item
  @code{:width} --- specifies the width of the image. Its default value is 1000.
@item
  @code{:height} --- specifies the height of the image. Its default value is 1000.
@end itemize

@defmac {@symbol{with-output-to-raster-image-stream,clime}}
An image describing the output to the @code{stream-var} stream will be
written to the stream @code{file-stream} using the format
@code{format}. @code{format} is a symbol that names the type of the
image. Valid values are @code{:png}, @code{:jpg}, @code{:jpeg},
@code{tiff}, @code{tif}, @code{gif}, @code{pbm}, @code{pgm}, and
@code{ppm}. Its default value is @code{:png}.
@end defmac

@defmac {@symbol{with-output-to-rgba-pattern,clime}}
An image describing the output to the @code{stream-var} stream will be
returned as an rgba pattern (of class @code{clime:image-pattern}).
@end defmac
